Create nfsserver.md (#1335)
rocky-linux/documentation: docs/guides/file_sharing/nfsserver.md

## Installation

2 services are required for NFS to function:

* The `network` service (of course);
* The `rpcbind` service.

Service status can be viewed using the commands:

```
systemctl status rpcbind
```

If the `nfs-utils` package is not installed:

```
sudo dnf install nfs-utils
```

The `nfs-utils` package requires several dependencies, including `rpcbind`, to be installed.

The NFS service can be started:

```
sudo systemctl enable --now nfs-server rpcbind
```

Installing the NFS service creates two users:

* `nobody`: used for anonymous connections;
* `rpcuser`: for RPC protocol operation.

The firewall have to be configured:

```
sudo firewall-cmd --add-service={nfs,nfs3,mountd,rpc-bind} --permanent 
sudo firewall-cmd --reload
```

## Server configuration

!!! warning "warning"

    Directory rights and NFS rights must be consistent.

### The `/etc/exports` file

Resource shares are set up in the `/etc/exports` file. Each line in this file corresponds to an NFS share.

```
/share_name	client1(permissions) client2(permissions)
```

* **/share_name**: Absolute path of shared directory;

> * **clients** : Clients authorized to access resources ;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **clients**: Clients authorized to access resources;
```

> * **(permissions)** : Permissions on resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **(permissions)**: Permissions on resources.
```

Machines authorized to access resources can be declared by:

* **IP address**: `192.168.1.2`
* **Network address**: `192.168.1.0/255.255.255.0` or CIDR format `192.168.1.0/24`
* **FQDN**: client_*.rockylinux.org: allows FQDNs starting with client_ from the rockylinux.org domain;
* `*` for everybody.

Multiple clients can be specified on the same line, separated by a space.

### Permissions on resources

There are two types of permissions:

> * `ro` : read-only;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `ro`: read-only;
```

> * `ro` : readonly;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `ro` : read-only;
```

> * `rw` : modification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `rw`: read-write.
```

Reviewer: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/read-write

If no right is specified, then the right applied will be read-only.

By default, client user UIDs and GIDs are conserved (except for `root`).

> To force the use of a UID or GID other than that of the user writing the resource, specify the `anonuid=UID` and `anongid=GID` options, or give `anonymous` access to the data with the `all squash`option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To force the use of a UID or GID other than that of the user writing the resource, specify the `anonuid=UID` and `anongid=GID` options, or give `anonymous` access to the data with the `all squash` option.
```

!!! warning "warning" 

>     There is a parameter, `no_root_squash`, which identifies the client root user as the server root user. This parameter can be dangerous for system security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There is a parameter, `no_root_squash`, which identifies the client root user as the server root user. This parameter can be dangerous from a system security point of view.
```

By default, the `root_squash` parameter is activated (even if not specified), identifying `root` as an `anonymous` user.

### Case studies

* `/share client(ro,all_squash)`
Client users have read-only access to resources and are identified as anonymous on the server.

* `/share client(rw)`
Client users can modify resources and keep their UID on the server. Only `root` is identified as `anonymous`.

* `/share client1(rw) client2(ro)`
Users on client workstation 1 can modify resources, while those on client workstation 2 have read-only access.
UIDs are kept on the server, and only `root` is identified as `anonymous`.

* `/share client(rw,all_squash,anonuid=1001,anongid=100)`
Client1 users can modify resources. Their UID is changed to `1001` and their GID to `100` on the server.

### The `exportfs` command

The `exportfs` (exported file systems) command is used to manage the table of local files shared with NFS clients.

```
exportfs [-a] [-r] [-u share_name] [-v]
```

| Options         | Description                               |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------------- |

> | `-a`            | Enable NFS shares                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-a`            | Enables NFS shares                         |
```

> | `-r`            | Apply shares from the `/etc/exports` file |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-r`            | Applies shares from the `/etc/exports` file |
```

| `-u share_name` | Disables a given share                    |
| `-v`            | Displays the list of shares               |

### The `showmount` command

The `showmount` command is used to monitor clients.

```
showmount [-a] [-e] [host]
```

| Options | Description                               |
| ------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| `-e`    | Displays shares on the designated server  |
| `-a`    | Displays all current shares on the server |

This command also determines whether the client workstation has authorization to mount shared resources.

!!! note "note"

>     `showmount`sorts and deletes duplicates in the results, so it's impossible to determine whether a client has made multiple mounts of the same directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `showmount` sorts and hides duplicates in the results, so it's impossible to determine whether a client has made multiple mounts of the same directory or not.
```

## Client configuration

> Access to shared resources on an NFS server is done by mount point on the client.

Reviewer: ?

Author: I don't know how to explain that in english.
It means you have to create a mount point on the client side to access to the data on server.

Reviewer: Shared resources on an NFS server are accessible through the mount point on the client.

Reviewer: through a mount point
or
through the mount point

> Access to shared resources on an NFS server is done by mount point on the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shared resources on an NFS server are accessible through a mount point on the client.
```
